tadanu nandamamandaśubhāspadaṃ nṛpapurīṃ karadānakṛte gatam|
samavalokya jagāda bhavatpitā viditakaṃsasahāyajanodyama: ||1||
tadanu nandam-	after that to Nanda
amanda-śubha-āspadam	(who is) of non dimmed virtues the abode
nṛpa-purīm	to the king's city
kara-dāna-kṛte gatam	to pay his tributes (taxes), who had gone
samavalokya	seeing (meeting)
jagāda bhavat-pitā	said (to Nanda), Thy father (Vasudeva)
vidita-kaṃsa-	who knew of Kansa's
sahāyajana-udyama:	and Kansa's supporters' activities
Thereafter, Nanda (who is the abode of undiminished virtues), went to the king's city to pay his tributes (taxes). On meeting him, Thy father Vasudeva who knew of the activities of Kansa and his supporters, told him that.
ayi sakhe tava bālakajanma māṃ sukhayate'dya nijātmajajanmavat |
iti bhavatpitṛtāṃ vrajanāyake samadhiropya śaśaṃsa tamādarāt ||2||
ayi sakhe	O friend!
tava bālaka janma	to you a son's birth
māṃ-sukhayate-adya	gives me pleasure now
nija-ātmaja-janmavat	my own son's birth like
iti bhavat-pitṛtāṃ	thus Thy fatherhood
vrajanāyake samadhiropya	to the cowherd chief, (he cleverly) attributed
śaśaṃsa tam-ādarāt	and praised him with affection
"O Friend! The birth of a son to you gives me pleasure as if a son were born to myself." Thus he cleverly attributed Thy fatherhood on Nanda, and praised him with affection.
iha ca santyanimittaśatāni te kaṭakasīmni tato laghu gamyatām |
iti ca tadvacasā vrajanāyako bhavadapāyabhiyā drutamāyayau ||3||
iha ca santi-	and here there are
animitta-śatāni	bad omens in hundreds
te kaṭaka-sīmni	at your residence
tata: laghu gamyatām	therefore soon (you) should go
iti ca tat-vacasā	and thus, by his (Vaudeva's) words
vrajanāyaka:	the cowherd chieftain (Nandagopa)
bhavat-apāya-bhiyā	to Thee danger apprehending
drutam-āyayau	quickly returned
"Here there are bad omens in hundreds and soon at your residence also it will not be safe, so you should return soon". Thus by Vasudeva's words, apprehending danger to Thee, Nanda quickly returned.
avasare khalu tatra ca kācana vrajapade madhurākṛtiraṅganā |
taralaṣaṭpadalālitakuntalā kapaṭapotaka te nikaṭaṃ gatā ||4||
avasare khalu tatra ca	at that time, indeed, and there
kācana vrajapade	some (female) in Gokula
madhura-ākṛti:-aṅganā	beautiful looking woman
tarala-ṣaṭpada-	(with) hovering bees
lālita-kuntalā	around (her) locks of hair (due to the sweet smell)
kapaṭa-potaka	(O Thou) in the guise of a child!
te nikaṭaṃ gatā	went near Thee
Just then there in Gokula, some beautiful looking woman with honey bees hovering around the sweet smelling flowers in her hair locks, entered. O Thou! In the guise of a child, she approached Thee.
sapadi sā hṛtabālakacetanā niśicarānvayajā kila pūtanā |
vrajavadhūṣviha keyamiti kṣaṇaṃ vimṛśatīṣu bhavantamupādade ||5||
sapadi sā	quickly she
hṛta-bālaka-cetanā	who had taken the children' lives
niśicara-anvaya-jā	of demon clan born
kila pūtanā	indeed Pootanaa
vraja-vadhūṣu-iha	among the Vraja women here
kā-iyam-iti	who is this, thus
kṣaṇaṃ vimṛśatīṣu	for a moment wondering
bhavantam-upādade	Thee lifted up (in her arms)
Quickly she, Pootanaa, born in the clan of demons, who had taken the lives of many children, lifted Thee up, even as the Vraja women were for a second wondering as to who she was.
lalitabhāvavilāsahṛtātmabhiryuvatibhi: pratiroddhumapāritā |
stanamasau bhavanāntaniṣeduṣī pradaduṣī bhavate kapaṭātmane ||5||
lalita-bhāva-vilāsa-	by her charming appearance and graceful movements
hṛta-ātmabhi:-yuvatibhi:	with captivated minds, the young women
pratiroddhum-apāritā	to deter (stop) not being able
stanam-asau	her breasts this (Pootanaa)
bhavana-anta-niṣeduṣī	inside the house sitting
pradaduṣī bhavate	gave (her breasts) to Thee
kapaṭa-ātmane	the illusive child
Her charming appearance and graceful movements captivated the minds of the Gopis who were unable to stop her from making advances. So this Pootanaa took her seat inside the house as she applied Thee, the illusive child, to her breasts.
samadhiruhya tadaṅkamaśaṅkitastvamatha bālakalopanaroṣita: |
mahadivāmraphalaṃ kucamaṇḍalaṃ praticucūṣitha durviṣadūṣitam ||7||
samadhiruhya tat-aṅkam-	climbing in her lap
aśaṅkita:-tvam-atha	unhesitatingly Thou then
bālaka-lopana-roṣita:	by the children' killing angered
mahat-iva-āmra-phalam	huge, as if it were a mango fruit
kuca-maṇḍalaṃ prati-cucūṣitha	the breast, sucked well
durviṣa-dūṣitam	with strong poison smeared
Thou who were angered by her killing of the children, unhesitatingly climbed in her lap and sucked well her poison smeared breasts as if it were a huge mango fruit.
asubhireva samaṃ dhayati tvayi stanamasau stanitopamanisvanā |
nirapatadbhayadāyi nijaṃ vapu: pratigatā pravisārya bhujāvubhau ||8||
asubhi:-eva samam	her life breath along with
dhayati tvayi stanam-	sucking (when) Thou were the breast
asau stanita-upama-nisvanā	this Pootanaa, with thunder like noise
nirapatat-	fell down
bhayadāyi nijaṃ vapu:	ferocious her own body
pratigatā	reverting to
pravisārya bhujau-ubhau	out stretching both the hands
Thou sucked the breast along with her life force. This Pootanaa fell down with a thunder like noise reverting to her natural ferocious body with both hands stretching out.
bhayadaghoṣaṇabhīṣaṇavigrahaśravaṇadarśanamohitavallave |
vrajapade tadura:sthalakhelanaṃ nanu bhavantamagṛhṇata gopikā: ||9||
bhayada-ghoṣaṇa-	the terrifying sound
bhīṣaṇa-vigraha-	and the frightful form
śravaṇa-darśana-	hearing and seeing
mohita-vallave	(which) stunned the gopas
vrajapade	and (the whole of) Gokul
tat-udara:-sthala-	on her chest
khelanaṃ nanu	playing indeed
bhavantam-agṛhṇata	Thee picked up
gopikā:	the Gopis
The whole of Gokul stood stunned hearing the terrifying sound and seeing the frightful form. The Gopis picked Thee up even as Thou were playing on the chest of the dead demoness.
tvamayi vātaniketananātha māmagadayan kuru tāvakasevakam ||10||
bhayada-ghoṣaṇa-	the terrifying sound
bhīṣaṇa-vigraha-	and the frightful form
śravaṇa-darśana-	hearing and seeing
mohita-vallave	(which) stunned the gopas
vrajapade	and (the whole of) Gokul
tat-udara:-sthala-	on her chest
khelanaṃ nanu	playing indeed
bhavantam-agṛhṇata	Thee picked up
gopikā:	the Gopis